From The New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
After the marathon negotiations between
the US and Iran this weekend failed to
produce any breakthroughs, the temporary
ceasefire appears more precarious than
ever.
One of the biggest questions looming
over it is Israel, and whether it will
accept peace or keep fighting a war on
multiple fronts that threatens any
chance of a deal.
Today, my colleagues Mark Mazzetti and
Ronen Bergman explain.
It's Monday, April 13th.
Ronen, Mark, hello. It is about 10:00
a.m. on Sunday on the East Coast, 5:00
p.m. where you are, Ronen, in Israel.
And we say that because things can
always change.
Thank you for joining us on a Sunday.
Thank you. Thanks for inviting us.
So, we've turned to you both throughout
this war to understand the role that
Israel has played in this conflict, and
that question has become more critical
than ever at this particular moment when
it appears that Israel continues to
actively threaten the ceasefire between
the US and Iran. And we're going to get
to how that's playing out, but first,
just help me understand the state of
things right now. Negotiators from Iran
and the US, including Vice President
J.D. Vance, met in Pakistan this
weekend. Mark, where do things stand?
So, J.D. Vance and a very senior
delegation of Iranian officials had a
marathon session on Saturday in
Islamabad, where they were meeting to
hash out some of their biggest
differences.
No one could tell what was happening in
the negotiations where a lot of
reporters were waiting around to find
out any piece of information and there
was nothing coming.
And then by Saturday night Washington
time, we get word that the talks had
broken down. Well, good morning
everybody and let me say a couple of
notes of appreciation. First of all,
J.D. Vance comes out and he announces
that there's no deal. We've been at it
now for 21 hours and
we've had a number of substantive
discussions with the Iranians. That's
the good news. The bad news is that we
have not reached an agreement and I
think that's bad news for Iran much more
than it's bad news for the United States
of America. So, the American delegation
is leaving Islamabad and there's really
no immediate prospects for another round
of negotiations, although that could
certainly happen.
>> We've made very clear what our red lines
are, what things we're willing to
accommodate them on and what things
we're not willing to accommodate them
on.
And we've made that as clear as we
possibly could and they have chosen not
to accept our terms. And meanwhile,
there's this sort of extraordinary
split-screen where And with us in the
building tonight,
President Trump is in Miami at a UFC
fight.
>> Oh, wow.
>> United States of America, Donald J.
Trump.
Projecting kind of indifference to the
whole thing. We'll see what happens.
Look, regardless,
we win. Regardless what happens, we win.
You know, he says to reporters on the
way down, "Well, I don't really care
what goes on in these negotiations
because we've already won." In addition
to that, when negotiating, whether we
make a deal or not, makes no difference
to me. He's already declared victory.
So, it was a sort of an amazing day that
ultimately ended very inconclusively in
terms of what's next in the war in Iran.
Right. Despite Trump's statement to the
contrary,
there is no resolution that's come out
of this. This thing is not over. It's
not won. It's very much still on the
table what's going to happen next.
Right. Iran still controls the Strait of
Hormuz, which remains closed.
Iran still has a stockpile of highly
enriched uranium, which the United
States wants it to give up.
And Iran is demanding economic sanctions
relief from these very crippling
sanctions that the United States for
years has imposed on the country.
And so, after all these negotiations on
Saturday, it doesn't appear there was
great progress on any of those fronts.
So, those are the main points of
contention, Mark. The strait being
closed, what happens with the stockpile
of highly enriched uranium, and
potential sanctions relief. Yes, that.
And there's another reason, which is
kind of more unstated and a bit more
under the radar. And that's Hezbollah in
Lebanon. Hm. Iran very much wants any
cessation of the war in Iran to be
coupled with an ending of Israeli
strikes against Hezbollah, which is a
critical proxy army for Iran.
And yet Israel doesn't want Hezbollah to
be part of any negotiated ceasefire, and
wants to keep that part of the war going
for its own reasons. Okay. We're going
to get to those reasons, but first, just
explain Israel and its position right
now for me, Ronan. The last time we all
talked on the show, you both told us
that Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu was worried that the US would
pull out of this war earlier than Israel
wanted, before its objectives were
achieved. And then, we got this
ceasefire last Tuesday after 5 weeks of
fighting. So, how did Israel react when
it learned that the US was taking what
looked like a first step toward ending
the war?
So, Benjamin Netanyahu, Israel's Prime
Minister,
was concerned that the US will sign a
ceasefire without
taking too much into account Israel's
position.
And then,
Netanyahu was trying to convince the
president, "We need more time."
But at the end, the president agreed to
a ceasefire. So, the whole thing was
presented as a joint war, Israel and the
US. Natalie Mark and I spoke about this
with you last time about how Netanyahu
was so pivotal in convincing Trump to
get into the war. But once the war
started,
Netanyahu was sidelined
to an extent, and Trump did not consult
with him about when to end the war and
in what terms. Wow. So, did did Israel
get a heads-up that Trump was about to
reach a ceasefire deal? Yeah, but only
at the very last minute. This was very
late on Tuesday, Israel time. They knew
that the the deal between the US and
Iran that will be soon announced by the
Pakistani Prime Minister includes a
ceasefire in Lebanon.
This is something they didn't like.
Prime Minister Netanyahu tried to
convince the president not to do that,
but the terms of the ceasefire, as they
found out, are not just about Iran, but
are also about a total ceasefire in the
war between Israel and Lebanon. Now,
this is a totally different ball game.
Why does it matter? Because the main
military force in Lebanon, Hezbollah,
are Iranian allies.
They started shooting at Israel
as a sort of a solidarity and under
pressure from Iran.
They wanted to have a small exchange of
fire. Israel reacted with massive force.
And after short while
both sides found themselves
totally deteriorated in all of all out
war.
And Israel
they said we will not stop until we
remove the threat. Remove the threat
meaning
dismantling Hezbollah, disarming
Hezbollah. So Hezbollah
found itself not just showing solidarity
to their core brothers brothers in Iran
but they realized that they in Lebanon
Hezbollah are fighting existential
threat themselves. A total new front
that Israel got itself totally mixed in.
Right. Israel got enmeshed in this war
within a war against Hezbollah in
Lebanon. And what you're saying is that
Israel is frustrated with the ceasefire
not just because they feel that they
weren't appropriately informed by their
partner the United States about all of
the terms of the agreement but that one
of the terms is a ceasefire in Lebanon.
Yeah. And for few hours there was
nothing said in Israel or in the US that
Lebanon is not included.
And during these few hours there were
like many many phone calls and
communication from Israel from Jerusalem
to the White House
and as I heard basically asking Trump
President Trump to
let Israel do at least one more round
but Netanyahu was in a tight spot. Hmm.
So just to be clear about what you're
saying Ronan
what was understood by both Israel, the
US and Iran was that Lebanon was
included in the ceasefire deal
originally and Israel because of that is
furiously trying to do diplomacy and
trying to persuade Trump to go back on
that to allow them to keep attacking in
Lebanon.
Israel did not agree to the ceasefire.
It accepted the ceasefire on Iran. It
did not accept the ceasefire on Lebanon.
I think this is where you see one
example of American-Israeli interests
diverging in the war in Iran. Say more.
Well, I mean, for one, you saw that
increasingly President Trump and his
advisers were growing frustrated that
the war was not achieving the effects
that they wanted it to achieve. Iran was
not buckling, right? And many in
Washington were kind of looking for an
exit, a way out of the war, a way
towards a ceasefire. Whereas in Israel,
there was a determination among Prime
Minister Netanyahu and his advisers to
keep this going longer to make sure this
would have a more conclusive end.
And on this issue of Lebanon and and
Hezbollah, I mean, effectively President
Trump, I don't think, cares what happens
in Lebanon and with Hezbollah. If If a
ceasefire in Lebanon is part of an
ultimate end to the war in Iran, I think
President Trump is perfectly happy with
that. But this is something that's far
more difficult for Prime Minister
Netanyahu to digest, as Ronan said.
And this divergence is on full display
on Wednesday, the day after the
ceasefire announcement.
>> Today, Israel unleashing a sprawling
barrage of more than 100 attacks on the
Lebanese capital, Beirut, the most since
the war began. When Israel launches a
massive bombardment against Hezbollah,
over 100 targets in minutes. We saw
piles of charred cars at major
intersections, mountains of rubble
clogging the roads, entire apartment
blocks razed to the ground.
>> Scores dead. But what we've really seen
are horrific scenes of people, including
children, being pulled from the rubble
of residential building, grocery stores,
shops. And it sort of laid bare this
idea that US and Israel are not at all
on the same page here. Yeah, the scenes
from that attack were just devastating.
Was Trump aware that this attack was
going to happen, Ronan?
As far as I understand, this is pushed
back by the official spokesperson, but
as far as I understand, the Americans
were aware that Israel is going to
strike, but they were shocked at the
extent of the strike.
I heard that they complained to the
Israelis that they didn't know what they
are going to bomb in it, the volume of
the bombing, of course, that the
collateral damage, the civilians that
were killed that reported from Lebanon.
Wow, you're saying the US did have some
knowledge that this was going to occur,
but didn't understand the magnitude of
it, just how far Israel was prepared to
go. And you saw the reaction from Iran.
Iranian leaders were furious about this,
and also recognized the leverage that
they have. If Washington really wants to
end the war in Iran,
the Iranians can also demand an end to
the war in Lebanon, and they can exploit
this theme I just talked about in the
US-Israeli relationship. So, that's what
they did. They basically said, "If you
want to sit down and talk about an end
of the war in Iran, well, Hezbollah and
Lebanon are part of the ceasefire, as
well." Which underscores just how much
this puts the entire ceasefire at risk,
which is obviously against Trump's
interests. So, why do that if you're
Israel?
Because Hezbollah and Lebanon are
absolutely central to the idea that
Prime Minister Netanyahu has set forward
about the security of Israel. As much as
he talks about Iran and the threat from
Iran, the threat from Hezbollah, as he's
laid out, is far closer, obviously, to
home, and central to his own political
future.
We'll be right back.
Ronan, as you've told us, Israel was
dead set against Lebanon being included
in the ceasefire deal in the first
place. So much so that they're willing
to put the whole thing at risk over it.
I want you to help deepen our
understanding of why, and particularly
of what Mark just said, that Hezbollah
and Lebanon are absolutely central to
Netanyahu's argument about Israel's
security. So just walk me through that
argument.
So,
people forget that before October 7th,
it was Hezbollah who was considered to
be the most fierce and threatening enemy
of Israel.
And Israel devoted so much
preparing for such a war. They knew one
day they would need to fight Hezbollah.
The extent they they didn't put enough
attention to Hamas. Mhm. Then Hamas
started October 7th, Hezbollah joined
the war on a low level, and it
accelerated through a year. And then in
September 24,
Israel
shocked the world,
and they exploded
some 3,500 pagers
that were on the waist of Hezbollah
operatives. And then for 10 days,
they continued to hammer Hezbollah.
They killed the the commanders,
they killed the troops, they exploded
the bunkers,
and Hezbollah had to stand down and
agree
then to a ceasefire
with humiliating terms.
This was all a
weapon, extraordinary
military intelligence operational
success. But as it happened in this war,
Prime Minister Netanyahu was not
satisfied just with this
victory.
He had to add more and he basically said
to the Israeli public,
"Israel decimated Hezbollah. We removed
the threat. Mhm. You all the refugees
that fled the north of Israel at the
beginning of the war,
you can go back. It's safe."
Netanyahu is saying basically that as a
result of this remarkable attack that
started with the pagers, I think we all
remember that, and then proceeded with
these waves of strikes taking out top
Hezbollah leaders, the message was,
"It's now safe for Israelis who lived in
the north of the country, which borders
Lebanon, to go home."
Yes, and so the reality happening in
Lebanon
was that Israel was attacking Hezbollah
every few days and Hezbollah did not
react.
And I think that gave, first of all, it
gave the Israeli people the sense that
Prime Minister Netanyahu was right.
There's no Hezbollah that are not
reacting. They're not retaliating.
And the second, it gave
the military officials a sense that they
can do to Hezbollah whatever they want,
Hezbollah will stay deterred. Wow. Well,
turned out not to be
that correct because
once Hezbollah recovered
and felt that this is now, this is
serious. This is about their own
existence as an armed force in Lebanon,
they started fighting back.
You're talking about the strikes that
Hezbollah carried out on Lebanon at
Iran's urging during this current war
that exposed the fact that Hezbollah had
not, in fact, been decimated.
Yes, the whole of the northern
hemisphere of Israel
started to be bombed again with rockets
and missiles. And you know, even this
house, the house I'm speaking to you
from, this is Tel Aviv. This is central
Israel.
We were bombed by Hezbollah. So, the the
not existed decimated Hezbollah was
still able to send missiles from Lebanon
to central Israel
just few days ago. So, suddenly the
Israeli public realized that
in Gaza, the war is not over.
Hamas is controlling half of the Gaza
Strip.
In Iran, the war is not over.
Iran is still sending missiles at Israel
after Netanyahu said the problem is
removed.
And now they realize that Hezbollah,
that Lebanon is the front is not over
because Hezbollah is shooting.
So, it's all like open fronts, one after
the other after almost 3 years of war.
It's still everything is open. Okay, I
want to talk about that issue of open
fronts. Is there an end point to this
now ongoing war with Hezbollah? I
understand that Netanyahu who is perhaps
trying to save face at home with a
public that realized that maybe they
were misled and finish the job against
this militant group, but when will
Israel feel it has done enough on that
front?
The main lesson that Israel learned that
it's not just Netanyahu.
You'll hear this from the lowest rank
officer of the IDF
or any other employee of the Israeli
defense establishment. The lesson they
learned from October 7th
is never let
a hostile force
grow and
get too strong.
Once this force
declares that its goal is to eliminate
the state of Israel.
So, the end game from Israel is to
dismantle Hezbollah, disarm Hezbollah.
This can be done
in only
three ways. It's either Hezbollah
does it or it's its own will. Unlikely.
Yeah, not very not very high. Second, is
that the Lebanese government
will
go in full force, take the weapon,
and enforce its sovereignty over
Hezbollah.
Now, this is something that the Lebanese
government
committed to do in the agreement of the
ceasefire between Israel and Lebanon
from September-October 2024. They
failed.
So, the
only alternative is that Israel will
conquer Lebanon
and dismantle Hezbollah, something that
Israel doesn't want to do.
They tried that in 1982 and it, you
know, it ended up
very badly.
And in the meantime, just to give some
sense of security to the
communities in the north,
they create a buffer zone,
a strip inside Lebanon where they'll
have forces that will divide between
citizens and
the operatives of Hezbollah at the other
side.
So, this is about punishing Israeli
enemies,
showing strength
for local consumption.
This buffer zone requires Israel
occupying part of Lebanon's territory,
right? Lebanese land. The implication,
of course, is that
Israel
plans or or some Israeli officials would
like to see real massive destruction in
parts of Lebanon continue.
And it's happening as we speak. Okay, so
it seems very clear why Israel is so
invested in this. I want to talk now
about Iran and why Iran is digging in
over this and threatening to hold up the
straight over these Israeli attacks.
Ronan, is it just because Hezbollah has
been such an important proxy for them in
the region for so long?
I think even much deeper. Shortly after
the Khomeini clerical revolution in
1979, Iran started to invest in proxies,
in forces and organizations outside of
Iran.
And the first one, and the closest ally,
was Hezbollah. They founded Hezbollah in
1983-84,
and then invested so much for basically
three reasons. One is that they come
from the same blood. They go to the same
religious schools in the holy city of
Qom and Najaf.
They are relatives. They are Shiites.
And it's not just about Iran and
Hezbollah.
And the word that we are looking for is
Muqawamah. Muqawamah in Arabic means
resistance.
Iran and its proxies, Hezbollah and the
Houthis and Hamas and Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and the militias in Iraq
and in Syria, they call themselves
Jabhat Muqawamah, the axis of
resistance. And this case
is a test of how much Iran is willing to
risk in order to save
the other partner of this axis. This is
the core of their partnership, the core
of their brotherhood.
And so Israel wants to break the
alignment.
Israel want to destroy the axis. Hm.
And I think that the next few days or
weeks are going to be
quite significant in the history of the
war, the regional war
between Israel and the axis of
resistance.
All right. I'm going to go out on a limb
here and say this all sounds like a very
difficult situation to resolve. Mark, I
want to turn back to you and ask, given
this history, what would a path to a
resolution even look like here?
Well, there's no easy path, and you
could see at the end of last week
everyone sort of grouping around trying
to figure out how to sort of handle all
of these thorny issues at once. There
was an announcement that Prime Minister
Netanyahu and the Israeli government
would begin discussions with the
Lebanese government about the future of
the conflict, but of course, the
Lebanese government is not speaking for
Hezbollah, and no one's dealing and
negotiating directly with Hezbollah. So,
that appeared to be a little bit of a
fig leaf to sort of appear something was
happening where no one really expects
much out of that. And given that all of
these issues are so closely stitched
together, it does seem like this is all
very intractable at the moment. When
we've talked in the past, guys, you've
both said that while a lot of people
view Netanyahu as having a certain
amount of sway over Trump, you've made
it clear that Netanyahu does fear Trump.
He does acquiesce to his demands. So,
can't Trump force Israel to stop
carrying out strikes that are
threatening this truce? I guess my
question is,
who is actually in charge here?
No doubt
Prime Minister Netanyahu acknowledged
that in a
speech
I think 3 weeks after the beginning of
the war, where at the beginning he said,
"We are partners, mutual partners." Then
he said "under the leadership of
President Trump."
He said something that was clear to any
soldier, any officer, any general in the
IDF, that this war will end only when
Trump says it's over. So, it's clear
that if President Trump
decides that something would happen
and be very strict with that,
the Prime Minister of Israel would not
go overt confrontation with him. No,
that's one of the things that he's very
strict with. He won't.
Yeah, we've talked a lot about how
instrumental Prime Minister Netanyahu
was in convincing President Trump to go
to the war against Iran. But ultimately,
as Ronan said, in this relationship
Trump holds the leverage in ending it,
and he can tell Netanyahu when the war
will end.
So, should we assume based on that that
Trump has not actually pulled that
ultimate lever yet?
Well, I think it's not clear to Trump
yet that Hezbollah and Lebanon are the
number one sticking point preventing a
deal with Iran.
But the more Hezbollah and Lebanon
become central
to whether this war ends or not,
the more I think the United States and
Trump will lean on Netanyahu to end the
campaign.
I want to just end by taking us back to
the beginning of this war, when Trump
decided to do something that no American
president had ever agreed to before,
which was teaming up with Israel to go
to war with Iran.
We're now in a situation where it's
unclear whether the two countries that
got into this war together are actually
on the same page about getting out of
it. And I just want to ask like is this
just the inevitable result of getting
into a joint war with a partner that
doesn't share your long-term goals?
I think that's partly right. There are
many things the Trump administration and
Benjamin Netanyahu are aligned on in
terms of what they see as important to
the security of the Middle East.
However,
once a war begins,
things go out of your control. And as
we've seen, Iran has not responded the
way that the United States and Israel
had hoped it would.
Iran has shown no sign that it is eager
to back down. And I think there's also a
sense
for Netanyahu that he's not going to get
another chance to do this.
A war against Iran has been
Netanyahu's
obsession for decades, and now he's got
the United States president leading the
war.
And once that ends,
it's probably not happening again.
And so he sees this as his last best
chance to achieve these goals in the
Middle East, and he's going to be
determined that nothing ends before he
gets most of what he wanted.
Which is why Netanyahu and his team and
ministers, when hearing
the announcement from Islamabad,
that negotiation fell apart,
they said, "Aha, you see? This is
President Trump that we like, that is
not giving up, that is going full force,
and they are hoping will go back to war
soon."
And so
this thing keeps going on.
Well, Mark, Ronen,
thank you so much.
Thanks, Ali.
On Sunday, the US military said that it
would blockade any ships entering and
departing Iranian ports beginning
Monday, but would allow other ships to
pass through the Strait of Hormuz.
The move was a step back from Trump's
earlier promise to block all traffic
through the strait.
In response, the speaker of Iran's
parliament directly addressed American
consumers, saying, quote, "Soon you'll
be nostalgic for $4 to $5 gas."
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
Eric Swalwell, a Democratic Congressman
from the Bay Area, said on Sunday that
he was suspending his campaign for
California governor in the wake of
allegations of sexual assault and
misconduct.
The accusations were published Friday in
articles by the San Francisco Chronicle
and CNN, and they prompted a wave of
rescinded endorsements and a criminal
investigation.
Swalwell repeatedly denied the
accusations and said in an X post on
Saturday that he was sorry for, quote,
"mistakes in judgment" and promised to
fight what he called false allegations.
And Viktor Orbán, the right-wing
populist who's been prime minister of
Hungary for 16 years, conceded that he
lost the country's general election on
Sunday.
Orbán was such a staunch ally of
President Trump's that Vice President
J.D. Vance flew to Budapest last week to
rally with him.
But Vance's appearance didn't help Orbán
avert a landslide defeat to the
center-right opposition, which is led by
a former Orbán loyalist, Péter Magyar.
Magyar campaigned on an anti-corruption
message and promised to improve
relations with the European Union, which
had been strained over Orbán's
pro-Russia stance.
Today's episode was produced by Asta
Chaturvedi, Michael Simon Johnson, and
Rochelle Banja. It was edited by Rachel
Quester and Patricia Willens and
contains music by Dan Powell and Pat
McCusker. Our theme music is by
Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Chris
Wood.
That's it for The Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow.